---
title: "Running on AAA battery"
slug: aaa
date: 2021-06-21
---

Wow, it feels like ages since I started working on making PsyLink run on a
rechargeable AAA battery. It sounds so simple and straight-forward, but it
wasn't :).  This ate 2.5 weeks of my time, but finally I succeeded!

[![photo, tilted perspective](/img/blog/2021-06-21_tilted.jpg)](/img/blog/2021-06-21_tilted.jpg)

Coming from software engineering, the iteration time of hardware prototypes is
horribly slow.  There was a lot of waiting for package deliveries, a lot of
time assembling, and a lot of wrestling with [leaky
abstractions](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Leaky_abstraction&oldid=1026549708).
For example, it wasn't enough to just connect the 1.2V->5V boost converter like
on the circuit diagram, but I had to take special care of the distances between
the parts, and the widths of the copper tracks connecting them.

Another problem you never face in software engineering is that the package with
electronics parts was stolen, and when the new PCB of {{% link "bp3" %}}
arrived, I had to work with the few remaining (suboptimal) parts that I had.

What almost drove me insane was that I had only one fresh TPS61220 chip left.
That's the 5V boost converter at position U1 (in the bottom of the red circle
on the photo below), which is so small that I don't really have the tools to
solder it on properly.  I kept accidentally connecting the pins of the chip
with solder.  I gave up and started asking around friends for whether they
could solder it on for me, when I remembered this soldering tip someone gave
me:  If you don't have soldering flux (which I didn't have), just use
✨margarine✨ instead ;D.  It sounds very wrong, but it actually made a huge
difference, and only thanks to the power of margarine I was able to keep the
solder exactly where I needed it to be.  "If it's stupid and it works, it's not
stupid."

Then - for whatever reason - the voltage was going up to 1.5V instead of 5V,
[just like with the previous PCB layout](/blog/believe).  I thought I [fixed
that problem by optimizing the layout around the TPS61220
chip](/blog/power-module3), but apparently that wasn't enough.  I figured the
4.7&micro;H inductance at L1 wasn't big enough, so I squeezed in a second coil:

[![photo, coil acrobatics](/img/blog/2021-06-21_acrobatics.jpg)](/img/blog/2021-06-21_acrobatics.jpg)

(It looks like two tardigrades playing ball :) I wish I made a better picture
before I disassembled it again)

This alone didn't help, but when I manually held an additional 10&micro;H
inductance in parallel to L1 for 1 second while the device was running, it
surprisingly kickstarted and reached 5V!... until I drained some current, which
made the voltage collapse back to 1.5V immediately.  Curious behavior. :D

Then I tried soldering on the big 10&micro;H coil directly onto the SMD pads,
and the voltage reached 5V and stayed at 5V =)

[![photo, front](/img/blog/2021-06-21_front.jpg)](/img/blog/2021-06-21_front.jpg)

No idea why the big 10&micro;H coil worked while the two smaller coils totaling
9.4&micro;H didn't work...  I doubt that the 0.6&micro;H difference in total
inductance turned the tide, probably there's some factor I'm not aware of.  I
actually had ordered a 10&micro;H SMD inductance coil in anticipation of this,
but well, it got stolen...  My only consolation is the face of the package
thieves when they open the package, they realize that it's just a couple of
tiny SMD parts, and they wonder WTF this shit is even good for.

More pictures:

[![photo, side](/img/blog/2021-06-21_side.jpg)](/img/blog/2021-06-21_side.jpg)
[![photo, back](/img/blog/2021-06-21_back.jpg)](/img/blog/2021-06-21_back.jpg)

The lack of parts forced me to adjust the resistance/inductance/capacitance
values of {{% link "c9" %}}:

[![circuit 9.1](/img/circuits/c9.1.png)](/c9.1)

Thankfully I had planned for way too many capacitors on the PCB, just for some
extra VROOOM, so the fact that I only had 10&micro;F capacitors instead of the
planned 100&micro;F didn't matter too much.

I also changed the 1M&Omega; resistors in the reference voltage generator to
110k&Omega; because I read that smaller resistances in a voltage divider make
the output voltage more stable, at the cost of more power use, but I think we
can sacrifice some power for signal accuracy.  No idea whether it's actually
going to help though.  I chose 110k&Omega; instead of the more common
100k&Omega; and 220k&Omega; because the boost converter already requires
a 110k&Omega; resistor, and that way this prototype requires fewer different
parts.  But the exact values don't matter, as long as both resistances are
identical.

Tomorrow I'll start working on the electrodes and wristband. :)
