---
title: "Wireless Prototype"
slug: psylink-prototype4
date: 2021-05-14
---

Hell yeah!  The PCBs arrived:

![pcb photo](data/psy/IMG_20210510_165536.crop.png)

## Soldering & Sewing

I never soldered such tiny SMD parts before, and didn't have proper tools, way
too thick soldering tin and solder iron tip.  I was also too impatient to order
some, so after hours of torture, I produced this batch:

![photo of 8 soldered pcbs for signal processing](data/psy/IMG_20210510_220906_HDR.crop.jpg)

The new prototype was to be a forearm sleeve of modal fabric once again, with
snap buttons for electrodes which will also hold the signal processing PCBs in
place.

But how to attach the Arduino and the power supply module to the sleeve?  I
thought, "why not Velcro?" (hook-and-loop fastener) and started sewing it to
the circuit boards:

![photo of me sewing velcro to the power supply module](data/psy/IMG_20210511_035833.crop.process.jpg)

(Yes, doing it felt as weird as it looks)

So I sewed the sleeve, assembled one electrode pair along with its processing
PCB, and wired everything together.  Here's me being overly excited about the
first wireless test run:

<video class="tab" style="max-width: 100%;" controls>
    Your browser does not support the &lt;video&gt; tag, download the video
    <a href="data/psy/video5-wireless.webm">here</a>.
    <source src="data/psy/video5-wireless.webm" />
</video>

## Electrode Placement

Then there was the question of *where* to put the electrodes.  Using an
improvised muscle map along with two flexible electrodes on individual straps,
I could find spots whose electrical activity correlated with turning the arm,
twisting the wrist, or pressing individual fingers onto the table:

[![photo of me mapping my forearm](data/psy/IMG_20210511_182254.color_enhance.sharpen.resize.thumb.jpg)](data/psy/IMG_20210511_182254.color_enhance.sharpen.resize.jpg)

[Flexor Digitorum
Superficialis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flexor_digitorum_superficialis_muscle)
was particularly interesting; I found 3 areas over that muscle which map to the
index, middle and ring finger each.  For turning the arm and wrist, the muscles
with "Carpi" in their name (e.g. [Extensor carpi
ulnaris](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extensor_carpi_ulnaris_muscle)) worked
pretty good.)  A huge disappointment was [Extensor
Digitorum](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Extensor_digitorum_muscle&oldid=1009414145),
which is supposed to be active when fingers move up, but I could not find such
correlation.  Then again, I use snap buttons for electrodes, so I'm not that
surprised.

The final layout of the electrodes:

[![electrode map](data/psy/IMG_20210512_055029_HDR.crop.annotate.jpg)](data/psy/IMG_20210512_055029_HDR.crop.annotate.jpg)

This piece is fully separable from the electronics and therefore machine
washable.

Here are additional pictures of the inner side, the separated electronics, as
well as everything combined.  This nicely shows the tree topology of the green
signal processing modules that pass through the power supply among each other
to reduce the volume of wiring.

[![inside](data/psy/IMG_20210512_055048_HDR.crop.thumb.jpg)](data/psy/IMG_20210512_055048_HDR.crop.jpg) [![electronics only](data/psy/IMG_20210512_054941_HDR.crop.thumb.jpg)](data/psy/IMG_20210512_054941_HDR.crop.jpg) [![everything combined](data/psy/IMG_20210512_053308_HDR.crop.resize.thumb.png)](data/psy/IMG_20210512_053308_HDR.crop.resize.png)

I could have had 8 electrode pairs, but only added electrodes for 7.  On these
pictures, the electrode pair for the middle finger is also missing the
circuitry.  That's mostly a testament to my laziness.

Actually I regret where I placed the Arduino, since there would be some great
spots for electrodes, but I noticed that too late.  Will try to remove the
Velcro and maybe add an 8th electrode pair there.

The final cyb3rware:

![photo of the final product](data/psy/IMG_20210512_172320_HDR.crop.cleanup.resize.sharpen.jpg)

While the signal was quite strong with the test straps, I found that the
amplitude of the signal went way down once I had everything attached to the
sleeve.  Maybe there was some kind of interference from the Arduino or the
power supply being closer to my skin, or maybe the modal fabric messes with the
signal somehow.  I hope I can compensate for this by increasing the signal
amplification multiplier, but I leave that for later.

This issue occurred with a single electrode pair already, but was aggravated
when attaching more of them.  It might help if I add some flux capacitors to
the power supplies to prevent cross-interference.

## Test Drive

[I drove F-Zero with Prototype #2 before](psylink-fzero.html), but back then I
cheated a little bit.  It only recognized 2 keys, left and right, and I
accelerated with the keyboard using my other hand.

This time I hoped I could do better, and trained the AI to recognize 3
different keys (left, right, accelerate) from my muscle signals.  It even
kinda worked!

<video class="tab" style="max-width: 100%;" controls>
    Your browser does not support the &lt;video&gt; tag, download the video
    <a href="data/psy/video6-fzero2.webm">here</a>.
    <source src="data/psy/video6-fzero2.webm" />
</video>

This was after recording ~2000 muscle signal samples over 1-2 minutes and
training a convolutional neural network for 25-50 epochs (<1 minute) on the
data using the [PsyLink
UI](https://codeberg.org/hut/psylink/src/commit/520d82595e1ae3516bf0d47a6a94ef4c4c668ad5/python/ui.py).
I used 4 electrode pairs, all of which are on the dorsal side of the forearm.

## Analysis

In the racing game, I didn't make it to the finish line yet, and it does look
pretty clumsy, but I blame it on the software still having some obvious flaws.
It doesn't even account for packet loss or packet duplication when handling the
Bluetooth packets yet.  Hope it will go better once I fixed them.  Also, the
test drive was with only 4 electrode pairs.

The raw values as visualized with the [GNURadio
flowgraph](https://codeberg.org/hut/psylink/src/branch/master/gnuradio/plot_signals.grc)
while randomly moving my forearm/wrist/hand show that the correlations between
the signals are low enough to be theoretically useful:

[![graphs of signals](data/psy/2021-05-15_23-53-16_1920x1080.crop.crop.png)](data/psy/2021-05-15_23-53-16_1920x1080.crop.png)

If you enlarge this image, you'll see that especially the black line is
considerably different, which I suppose is because it's the only electrode pair
that spans across several muscles.  And that makes me wonder: Am I doing too
much pre-processing in hardware before I feed the data into the AI?  Sure, the
differential amplification of this new prototype enhances small signals that
the previous prototypes might have not detected, but a lot of information is
lost too, like the voltage differences between electrodes from different
electrode pairs.

Maybe I can compensate for this by simply adding some more electrode pairs that
span muscles.  I'm also thinking of switching to a design with 32-64 randomly
placed electrodes -> [buffer
amplifiers](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Buffer_amplifier&oldid=1017094718)
-> [multiplexers](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Multiplexer&oldid=1018543479)
-> analog to digital converters of the Arduino.  That way, the neural network
can decide for itself which voltage differences it wants to look at.

## New PCB layout

While soldering the PCB, I found some flaws and made these changes to the
[previous PCB](psylink-pcb.html):

- Added silkscreen labels to the connectors and components.  I was sure I
  wouldn't mix up anything since there aren't many connectors, they're nicely
  symmetrical, and I'm the designer after all. But nope.  I still mixed them
  up.
- Removed unnecessary [vias](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Via_(electronics)).
  (I was actually not sure whether the pin holes will really conduct between
  the front and the back side of the board, so I added vias as a safety
  measure.)
- The label now shows the new name ["psylink" instead of "myocular"](psylink-new-name.html)
- A friend also gave me the tip to increase the thickness of power supply wires

![psylink6 PCB](data/psy/psylink6-pcb2.mod.png)
